---
layout: post
title: The Fundamentals of Everything
author: Aqeel Akber
comments: true
date: 2017-01-12 13:00 +1100
mathjax: false
tags:
  - physics
  - scicomm
---

Yesterday it was my pleasure to brief high school students and
teachers attending [National Youth Science
Forum](http://www.nysf.edu.au/) on particle physics before a video
linkup to Rolf Landua at CERN. Here I give a brief overview of the
talk given in Canberra and provide the slides.

In order to translate The Standard Model from the language of the
universe (math) to English I used a analogy close to society. I
described particles as people, and the standard model describes how
they behave.

Starting with the particles. Fermions are people who are individually
rich with a sort of resource but the grass is always greener and they
want trade their resource with others. Bosons are then specialist
merchants (or bankers) that facilitate this trade.

Then two more concepts to describe their behaviour.

1. The word of the law is that total energy and charge must be
conserved.

2. Fermions exchange is in favour of minimising their energy, and
neutralizing their charge i.e. they prefer to live in calm, neutral
communities.

From these simple rules are built nuclei to form the elements. Then,
bind electrons to them which then facilitates in production of
molecules. The electrical signal that flows down your optic nerve that
allows you to read this text are just electrons passing down the
photon (light quanta) to the brain. X-ray images can be thought of a
map of communities of atoms that are greedy for photons, an MRI is the
same but rather for greedy protons.

Remembering that in order find that these particles exist in the first
place required great feats of engineering (accelerators), the trickle
down effect of technological developments leads to
miniaturisation. Accelerators are now used in cutting edge cancer
therapy that minimises radiation exposure. In addition, accelerators
are used in ultra precise mass spectrometry that can measure trace
elements (1 million atoms is tiny compared to a mole!) in soil.

Understanding the fundamentals of nature has changed the way I see the
world. Not just literally, I take physics brain everywhere I go and
apply the same vision to every experience I have.

### Slides

You can view the slides below. To download, follow the link below to
SlideShare for a download option.

<iframe src="//www.slideshare.net/slideshow/embed_code/key/3KrmvROOw8ZM8N" width="595" height="485" frameborder="0" marginwidth="0" marginheight="0" scrolling="no" style="border:1px solid #CCC; border-width:1px; margin-bottom:5px; max-width: 100%;" allowfullscreen> </iframe> <div style="margin-bottom:5px"> <strong> <a href="//www.slideshare.net/AqeelAkber/the-fundamentals-of-everything-nysf-2017" title="The Fundamentals of Everything. [NYSF 2017]" target="_blank">The Fundamentals of Everything. [NYSF 2017]</a> </strong> from <strong><a target="_blank" href="//www.slideshare.net/AqeelAkber">Aqeel Akber</a></strong> </div>

### Contact Aqeel

Find me on [twitter](https://twitter.com/AdmiralAkber) or leave a
comment below.